Artificial intelligence (AI) is technology that enables computers and machines to simulate human learning, comprehension, problem solving, decision making, creativity and autonomy.

Applications and devices equipped with AI can see and identify objects. They can understand and respond to human language. They can learn from new information and experience. They can make detailed recommendations to users and experts. They can act independently, replacing the need for human intelligence or intervention (a classic example being a self-driving car).

But in 2024, most AI researchers, practitioners and most AI-related headlines are focused on breakthroughs in generative AI (gen AI), a technology that can create original text, images, video and other content. To fully understand generative AI, it’s important to first understand the technologies on which generative AI tools are built: machine learning (ML) and deep learning.


Generative AI, sometimes called "gen AI", refers to deep learning models that can create complex original content such as long-form text, high-quality images, realistic video or audio and more in response to a user’s prompt or request.

At a high level, generative models encode a simplified representation of their training data, and then draw from that representation to create new work that’s similar, but not identical, to the original data.

Generative models have been used for years in statistics to analyze numerical data. But over the last decade, they evolved to analyze and generate more complex data types. This evolution coincided with the emergence of three sophisticated deep learning model types:

Variational autoencoders or VAEs, which were introduced in 2013, and enabled models that could generate multiple variations of content in response to a prompt or instruction.

Diffusion models, first seen in 2014, which add "noise" to images until they are unrecognizable, and then remove the noise to generate original images in response to prompts.

Transformers (also called transformer models), which are trained on sequenced data to generate extended sequences of content (such as words in sentences, shapes in an image, frames of a video or commands in software code). Transformers are at the core of most of today’s headline-making generative AI tools, including ChatGPT and GPT-4, Copilot, BERT, Bard and Midjourney.